# 1.6: The Theory of Vector Fields

## 1.6.1: The Helmholtz Theorem

Ever since Faraday, the laws of electricity and magnetism have been expressed in terms of _electric_ and _magnetic_ fields, __E__ and __B__. Like many physical laws, these are most compactly expressed as differential equations. Since __E__ and __B__ are vectors, the differential equations naturally involve vector derivatives: divergence and curl. Indeed, Maxwell reduced the entire theory to four equations, specifying respectively the divergence and the curl of __E__ and __B__.

Maxwell's formulation raises an important mathematical question: To what extent is a vector function determined by its divergence and curl? In other words, if I tell you that the divergence of __F__ (which stands for __E__ or __B__, as the case may be) is a specified (scalar) function D,

{{< katex display >}}
\div \vec{F} = D
{{< /katex >}}

and the curl of __F__ is a specified (vector) function __C__,

{{< katex display >}}
\curl \vec{F} = \vec{C}
{{< /katex >}}

can you then determine the function __F__?

Well... not quite. For example, as you may have discovered in Prob. 1.20, there are many functions whose divergence and curl are both zero everywhere - the trivial case \\( \vec{F} = 0 \\), of course, but also \\( \vec{F} = yz \vu{x} + zx \vu{y} + xy \vu{z}, \vec{F} = \sin x \cosh y \vu{x} - \cos x \sinh y \vu{y} \\), etc. To solve a differential equation you must also be supplied with appropriate __boundary conditions__. In electrodynamics we typically require that the fields go to zero "at infinity" (far away from all charges). With that extra information, the Helmholtz theorem guarantees that the field is uniquely determined by its divergence and curl. (The Helmholtz theorem is discussed in Appendix B.)

## 1.6.2: Potentials

If the curl of a vector field (__F__) vanishes (everywhere), then __F__ can be written as the gradient of a __scalar potential__ (V):

{{< katex display >}}
\curl \vec{F} = 0 \Longleftrightarrow \vec{F} = - \grad V \tagl{1.103}
{{< /katex >}}

(The minus sign is purely conventional.) That's the essential burden of the following theorem:

!!! info "__Theorem 1__. Curl-less (or 'irrotational') fields. The following conditions are equivalent (that is, __F__ satisfies one if and only if it satisfies all the others):"

    
{{< katex display >}}
    \tag{a} \curl \vec{F} = 0 \text{ everywhere }
    {{< /katex >}}

    
{{< katex display >}}
    \tag{b} \int_a ^b \vec{F} \cdot \dd \vec{l} \text{ is independent of path, for any given end points}
    {{< /katex >}}

    
{{< katex display >}}
    \tag{c} \oint \vec{F} \cdot \dd \vec{l} = 0 \text{ for any closed loop}
    {{< /katex >}}

    
{{< katex display >}}
    \tag{d} \vec{F} \text{ is the gradient of some scalar function: } \vec{F} = - \grad V
    {{< /katex >}}


The potential is not unique, and any constant can be added to V with impunity, since this will not affect its gradient. 

If the divergence of a vector field (__F__) vanishes (everywhere), then __F__ can be expressed as the curl of a __vector potential__ (__A__):

{{< katex display >}}
\div \vec{F} = 0 \Longleftrightarrow \vec{F} = \curl \vec{A} \tagl{1.104}
{{< /katex >}}

That's the main conclusion of the following theorem:

!!! info "__Theorem 2__. Divergence-less (or 'solenoidal') fields. The following conditions are equivalent:"

    
{{< katex display >}}
    \tag{a} \div \vec{F} = 0 \text{ everywhere}
    {{< /katex >}}

    
{{< katex display >}}
    \tag{b} \int \vec{F} \cdot \dd \vec{a} \text{ is independent of surface, for any given boundary line}
    {{< /katex >}}

    
{{< katex display >}}
    \tag{c} \oint \vec{F} \cdot \dd \vec{a} = 0 \text{ for any closed surface.}
    {{< /katex >}}

    
{{< katex display >}}
    \tag{d} \vec{F} \text{ is the curl of some vector function: } \vec{F} = \curl \vec{A}
    {{< /katex >}}


The vector potential is not unique - the gradient of any scalar function can be added to __A__ without affecting the curl, since the curl of a gradient is zero.

Incidentally, in _all_ cases (whatever its curl and divergence may be), a vector field __F__ can be written as the gradient of a scalar plus the curl of a vector:

{{< katex display >}}
\vec{F} = - \grad V + \curl \vec{A} \quad \text{(always)} \tagl{1.50}
{{< /katex >}}


> In physics, the word field denotes generically any function of position (x, y, z) and time (t). But in electrodynamics two particular fields (__E__ and __B__) are of such paramount importance as to preempt the term. Thus technically the potentials are also "fields," but we never call them that.