---
title: Introduction to Kinetic Theory
weight: 50
# bookToc: false
---



{{< katex display >}}

{{< /katex >}}

## Timescale Hierarchy

What happens to a perturbation in a plasma comprised of \\( N \\) particles, each with independent \\( \vec x \\) and \\( \vec v \\)? The timescales that define the statistical equilibria define some different regimes.

1. On the timescale of the plasma frequency (\\( 1 / \omega_p \\)), Coulomb potentials are shielded within the region of a Debye sphere. This is the fastest timescale that's relevant to plasma dynamics, because it is the speed at which electrons can move.

2. The velocity distribution relaxes to a local Maxwellian (local thermal equilibrium) on a collisional timescale \\( \nu^{-1} = \frac{1}{\omega_p} \frac{\Lambda}{\ln \Lambda} \gg \frac{1}{\omega_p} \\), where \\( \Lambda \\) is the plasma parameter \\( \Lambda = n \lambda_D ^3 \gg 1 \\)

3. Macroscopic force balance is established on a timescale \\( \nu ^{-1} \sim L / v_{th} \\) where \\( L \\) is a characteristic length of the plasma and \\( v_{th} \\) is the electron thermal speed. This determines the thermal motion of the electrons.

4. Hydrodynamic diffusion happens on a much longer timescale, over which the electrons and ions reach a Maxwellian distribution. If magnetized, this time is like \\( \frac{1}{\nu} (L / \rho)^2 \\), and if the plasma is unmagnetized the timescale is \\( \frac{1}{\nu} (L / \lambda_{eff})^2 \\).

### Timescales and regimes:

1. \\( t = 0 \\), arbitrary initial distribution in space and velocity, determined by the Klimontovich equation

2. \\( t > \frac{1}{\omega_p} \\): Debye shielding established in plasma. Kinetic theory holds with the Vlasov equation

3. \\( t > \frac{1}{\nu} \\): Distribution functions approach local Maxwellian. Fokker-Planck equation

4. \\( t \gg \frac{1}{\nu} \\): Distribution functions approach global Maxwellian. Fully into fluid theory. This can be very long time for a hot plasma, usually scales with \\( T_e ^{3/2} \\). But as it turns out, fluid assumptions hold pretty well for a lot of laboratory plasmas for other reasons.

## Kinetic Theory

Kinetic theory is concerned with determining the evolution of a distribution \\( f(t, \vec x, \vec v) \\) for each species.

If \\( f \\) is a Maxwellian, the temperature specifies the velocity distribution

{{< katex display >}}
f(t, \vec x, \vec v) \rightarrow f(t, \vec x)
{{< /katex >}}

{{< katex display >}}
f_m (v_x) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2 \pi} \sqrt{T_{e}/m}} e^{- \frac{v_x ^2}{2 (T_{ev}/m)}}
{{< /katex >}}

The temperature \\( T_{e} \\) determines the spread of the distribution.

### Kinetic equations

The distribution function \\( f(\vec x, \vec v, t) \\) needs to satisfy the Boltzmann equation for conservation in phase space. This is just a statement of conservation of particles

{{< katex display >}}
\dv{}{t} f(\vec x, \vec v, t) = \pdv{f}{t} + \vec v \cdot \grad f + \frac{\vec F}{m} \cdot \pdv{f}{\vec v} = \left( \dv{f}{t} \right)_C
{{< /katex >}}

where \\( \vec F / m \\) is simply the time change of velocity itself

{{< katex display >}}
\frac{\vec f}{m} = \pdv{\vec v}{t}
{{< /katex >}}

and the collision operator \\( \left( \dv{f}{t} \right)_C \\) determines particle-particle interactions. For collisions with neutral atoms, we can use the Krook collision term:

{{< katex display >}}
\left( \dv{f}{t} \right)_C = \frac{f_n - f}{\tau}
{{< /katex >}}

where \\( f_n \\) is a distribution for neutral particles and \\( f \\) is the distribution for the species of interest.

For Coulomb collisions, we use the Fokker-Planck collision operator:

{{< katex display >}}
\left( \dv{f}{t} \right)_C = - \pdv{}{\vec v} \cdot ( f \langle \Delta \vec v \rangle ) \frac{1}{2} \pdv{^2}{\vec v \partial \vec v} \cdot (f \langle \Delta \vec v \Delta \vec v \rangle)
{{< /katex >}}

Coulomb collisions are generally smoother and longer-range.

### BBGKY Hierarchy

A microscopic description of the plasma is the most exact description. With \\( > 10^{20} \\) particles in a typical volume, we need to expand the microscopic model up to longer scales. This is basically a question of when we can ignore individual particle-to-particle interactions.

At length scales \\( \geq \lambda_D \\), individual particle effects are shielded, and the collective effects of particles caught within the Debye sphere dominates the dynamics.

The collision term can be modeled as the ensemble average of interactions between may particles. We define the plasma parameter \\( \Lambda \\) as

{{< katex display >}}
\Lambda ^{-1} = \frac{1}{n \lambda_D ^3} \ll 1
{{< /katex >}}

We can classify equations for 2-body interactions (\\( g_{\alpha \beta} \\)), 3-body interactions (\\( h_{\alpha \beta \gamma} \\)), etc. and order them as 

{{< katex display >}}
\begin{aligned}
\uparrow & \qquad f_\alpha \sim O(1) \\
\uparrow & \qquad g_{\alpha \beta} \sim O(\Lambda ^{-1}) \\
\uparrow & \qquad h_{\alpha \beta \gamma} \sim P(\Lambda ^{-2})
\end{aligned}
{{< /katex >}}

{{< katex display >}}
\dv{f_\alpha}{t} = \sum_\beta \frac{q_\alpha q_\beta}{m_\alpha} \int \dd x' \dv{}{\vec x} \frac{1}{|\vec x - \vec x'|} \cdot \pdv{g_{\alpha \beta}(t, \vec x, \vec x')}{\vec v}
{{< /katex >}}

with \\( g_{\alpha \beta} \\) having its own evolution equation with \\( h_{\alpha \beta \gamma} \\) terms. We close the system with \\( h_{\alpha \beta \gamma} \rightarrow 0 \\).

### Vlasov Equations

If we drop the \\( g_{\alpha \beta} \\) terms, we ignore binary interactions. We substitute electromagnetic forces for \\( \vec F \\) to get:

{{< katex display >}}
\dv{f}{t} = \pdv{f}{t} + \vec v \cdot \grad f + \frac{q}{m} (\vec E + \vec v \cross \vec B) \cdot \pdv{f}{\vec v} = 0
{{< /katex >}}

This is the collision-neglected Boltzmann equation. The rationale for ignoring 2-particle interactions is

{{< katex display >}}
g_{\alpha \beta} \sim \frac{f_\alpha}{\Lambda}
{{< /katex >}}
and as \\( \Lambda \rightarrow \infty \\), \\( g_{\alpha \beta} \rightarrow 0 \\)

This assumption is valid either when density is very high, or \\( \lambda_D = \sqrt{\epsilon_0 T_e}{e^2 n_e} \\) has to very large, which happens at very high temperatures. Physically, if kinetic energy of interactions dominates the potential energy change, then the plasma behaves like a perfect gas.

The full set of "Vlasov equations" includes the Maxwell equations to complete the picture and determine the interaction between the electromagnetic fields and their sources

{{< katex display >}}
\rho = \sum_j q_j \int \dd ^3 v f_j
{{< /katex >}}
{{< katex display >}}
\vec j = \sum_j q_j \int \dd ^3 v \vec v f_j
{{< /katex >}}

What does setting the correlation term \\( \left( \dv{f}{t} \right)_C \\) to zero? The left-hand-side of the Boltzmann equation is just the total derivative of the distribution function in phase space, so we have just assumed that \\( f \\) is constant in phase space.

## Waves in Thermal, Unmagnetized Plasma using Vlasov Equations

In a uniform plasma with \\( T > 0 \\), \\( \vec E_0 = \vec B_0 = 0 \\) and equilibrium distribution function \\( f_0 (\vec v) \\), a perturbation in \\( f(\vec x, \vec v, t) \\) can be written as

{{< katex display >}}
f(\vec x, \vec v, t) = f_0( \vec v) + f_1 (\vec x, \vec v , t) 
{{< /katex >}}

Linearized Vlasov equation is

{{< katex display >}}
\pdv{f_1}{t} + \vec v \cdot \grad f_1 - \frac{e}{m} \vec E_1 \cdot \pdv{f_0}{ \vec v} = 0
{{< /katex >}}

Assuming high ion inertia and that the waves are plane waves in the \\( \vu{x} \\) direction

{{< katex display >}}
f_1 = \hat f_1 e^{i (kx - \omega t)}
{{< /katex >}}

Fourier transform to get

{{< katex display >}}
-i \omega f_1 + i k v_x f_1 - \frac{e}{m} E_x \pdv{f_0}{v_x} = 0
{{< /katex >}}

{{< katex display >}}
f_1 = \frac{i e E_x}{m} \frac{\pdv{f_0}{v_x}}{\omega - k v_x}
{{< /katex >}}

What's the electric field? We go ask Maxwell

{{< katex display >}}
\epsilon_0 \div \vec E_1 = - e n_1 = - e \int f_1 \dd ^3 v
{{< /katex >}}

Applying Fourier transform, we also assume an electrostatic form of the solution. That is, the wave is propagating along the x-direction, and the electric field also only varies in the x-direction.

{{< katex display >}}
i k \epsilon_0 E_x = -e \int f_1 \dd ^3 v
{{< /katex >}}

and substituting our expression for \\( f_1 \\), we arrive at our dispersion relation:

{{< katex display >}}
D(\omega, k) = 1 + \frac{e^2}{k m \epsilon_0} \int \frac{\partial f_0 / \partial v_x}{\omega - k v_x} \dd ^3 v = 0
{{< /katex >}}

We can back out the background density from the distribution function, leaving us with the first moment of the normalized distribution function \\( \hat f_0(v) \\)

{{< katex display >}}
n_0 = \int f_0 \dd \vec v = n_0 \int \hat f_0 \dd v
{{< /katex >}}

{{< katex display >}}
D(\omega, k) = 1 - \frac{\omega_p ^2}{k^2} \int \frac{\partial \hat f_0 / \partial v_x}{v_x - (\omega / k)}
{{< /katex >}}

Electrostatic dispersion relation is not easily solved. Note that if \\( v_x = v_\phi = \omega / k \\), the integral has a singularity. But, the integral only carries a singularity if \\( \omega / k \\) is not complex. If \\( \omega = \omega_r + i \omega _i \\) with \\( \omega_i \neq 0 \\), the singularity is no longer a problem.

Vlasov's approach is to ignore \\( \omega_i \\) and the singularity at \\( v_\phi = \omega /k \\) by considering only the Cauchy principal value of the integral.

It's easier to examine the case when the phase velocity is much greater than the thermal velocity. If we take a small gap of size \\( 2 \epsilon \\) out of \\( v_x \\) near \\( v_\phi \\), the contribution from \\( \partial \hat f_0 / \partial v_x \\) is vanishingly small. Expanding the integral by parts,

{{< katex display >}}
\int _{-\infty} ^{\infty} \frac{\partial \hat f_0 / \partial v_x}{v_x - v_\phi} \dd v = \\
 \lim _{\epsilon \rightarrow 0} \left[ \left. \frac{\hat f_0}{v_x - v_\phi} \right|_{- \infty} ^{v_\phi - \epsilon} - \int _{- \infty} ^{v_\phi - \epsilon} - \frac{\hat f_0 \dd v_x}{(v_x - v_\phi)^2} + \left. \frac{\hat f_0}{v _x - v_\phi} \right|_{v_\phi + \epsilon} ^\infty - \int _{v_\phi + \epsilon} ^\infty \frac{\hat f_0 \dd v_x}{(v_x - v_\phi)^2}  \right] \\
 = \lim _{\epsilon \rightarrow 0} \left[ - \int _{- \infty} ^{v_\phi - \epsilon} - \frac{\hat f_0 \dd v_x}{(v_x - v_\phi)^2} - \int _{v_\phi + \epsilon} ^\infty \frac{\hat f_0 \dd v_x}{(v_x - v_\phi)^2} \right] \\
 \equiv \sout{\int} _{-\infty} ^\infty \frac{\hat f_0 \dd v_x }{(v_x - v_\phi)^2}
{{< /katex >}}

where we define the integral excluding \\( v_\phi \pm \epsilon \\) to be \\( \sout{\int}_{-\infty} ^{\infty} \\). 

{{< katex display >}}
D(\omega, k) = 1 - \frac{\omega_p ^2}{k ^2} \sout{\int} _{-\infty} ^{\infty} \frac{\partial \hat f_0 / \partial v_x}{v_x - (\omega / k)} \dd v_x \\
= 1 - \frac{\omega_p ^2}{k ^2} \sout{\int} _{-\infty} ^{\infty} \frac{\hat f_0 \dd v_x}{(v_x - v_\phi)^2}
{{< /katex >}}

Assuming \\( v_\phi \gg v_x \\), then

{{< katex display >}}
\frac{1}{(v_x - v_\phi)^2} = \frac{1}{\left[- v_\phi(1 - v_x / v_\phi) \right]^2} \\
= \frac{1}{v_\phi ^2} (1 - \frac{v_x}{v_\phi})^{-2} \\
= \frac{1}{v_\phi ^2} \left( 1 + 2 \frac{v_x}{v_\phi} + 3 \frac{v_x ^2}{v_\phi ^2} + \ldots \right)
{{< /katex >}}

Then

{{< katex display >}}
D(\omega, k) = 1 - \frac{\omega_p ^2}{\frac{\omega ^2}{k^2} k^2} \left[ \sout{\int} _{-\infty} ^{\infty} \hat f_0 \dd v_x + \frac{2}{v_\phi} \sout{\int} _{-\infty} ^{\infty} v_x \hat f_0 \dd v_x + \frac{3}{v_\phi ^2} \sout{\int} _{-\infty} ^{\infty} v_x ^2 \hat f_0 \dd v_x + \ldots \right]
{{< /katex >}}

Because \\( v_x \hat f_0 \\) is an odd function,

{{< katex display >}}
\sout{\int} _{-\infty} ^{\infty} v_x \hat f_0 \dd x \approx \int _{-\infty} ^{\infty} v_x \hat f_0 \dd x = 0
{{< /katex >}}

{{< katex display >}}
\sout{\int} _{-\infty} ^{\infty} \hat f_0 \dd v_x \approx \int _{-\infty} ^{\infty} \hat f_0 \dd v_x = 1
{{< /katex >}}
{{< katex display >}}
\int _{-\infty} ^{\infty} v_x ^2 \hat f_0 \dd v_x = \langle v_x ^2 \rangle
{{< /katex >}}


{{< katex display >}}
\rightarrow D(\omega, k) = 1 - \frac{\omega_p ^2}{\omega ^2} \left[ 1 + \frac{3 \langle v_x ^2 \rangle}{v_\phi ^2} \right] = 0
{{< /katex >}}

If \\( T = 0 \\) then \\( \langle v_x ^2 \rangle = 0 \\) then \\( D(\omega, k) = 0 \\) and \\( \omega ^2 = \omega _p ^2 \\) which is the cold plasma electrostatic dispersion relation. So we can think of the second term as a thermal correction to the electrostatic cold plasma dispersion relation.

If \\( \omega \approx \omega_p \\) and noting that \\( \langle v_x ^2 \rangle = v_t ^2 \\), then

{{< katex display >}}
\omega ^2 = \omega _p ^2 + 3 k ^2 v_t^2
{{< /katex >}}

which is the Bohm-Gross dispersion relation.